[RHIDP-11458]: Document session management in RHDH (#2035)
redhat-developer/red-hat-developers-documentation-rhdh: modules/shared/con-understand-session-management-in-rhdh.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: CONCEPT

[id="understand-session-management-in-rhdh_{context}"]
= Understand session management in {product-short}

[role="_abstract"]
Session management in {product} involves multiple mechanisms that control how long users stay authenticated and what happens when sessions expire.

== What happens when a session expires

When a session approaches expiration, {product-short} can display a pre-expiration warning dialog that includes a countdown timer.
The timing of this warning depends on how you configure the auto-logout feature.

After the session expires, {product-short} redirects the user to the login page.
To continue working, the user must re-authenticate with the configured identity provider and is then returned to {product-short}.

// TODO: Screenshot placeholder: warning dialog
// TODO: Screenshot placeholder: login redirect

== AutoLogout (frontend inactivity)

The AutoLogout feature monitors user activity in the browser and logs out the user after a configurable idle period.

> AutoLogout is a frontend-only mechanism: it does not revoke tokens or end Identity Provider (IdP) sessions.

Reviewer: The session is not terminated in the IdP side but the refresh token for RHDH is revoked. The logout mechanism is the same as if you manually logout from the user settings page.

Author: ```suggestion
AutoLogout revokes the refresh token for {product-short}, but does not end the Identity Provider (IdP) session.
The logout mechanism is the same as if you manually logout from the user settings page.
```

You configure AutoLogout under the `auth.autologout` section of your `{my-app-config-file}` file.

== Session duration (provider-level)

Session duration controls the absolute session lifetime regardless of user activity.

> When this duration elapses, the session expires even if the user is actively working.

Reviewer: No popup will occur when this expires and will remove the user to the sign-in page when manually refreshed. This is a backend HTTP-only cookie config and should not be used to trigger the pop up.

You configure session duration per provider by using the `auth.providers.<name>.<env>.sessionDuration` parameter in your `{my-app-config-file}` file.
This parameter accepts milliseconds, ISO duration, or human-readable duration values (for example, `24h`, `2 days`).

== Token expiration ({backstage} tokens)

Token expiration controls the validity period of the short-term cryptographic tokens that {product-short} uses internally.
This is not the same as session duration: tokens are refreshed automatically within an active session.

> The default token expiration is 1 hour, and the valid range is 10 minutes to 24 hours.

Reviewer: when backstage-auth is about to expire, it tries to refresh the cookie and pop up appears if it cannot be refreshed (i.e. the IdP session is terminated)

Imo we don't need to mention this config as it provides little utility for our customers
